How to invest $50,000 right now, according to experts
By Ana Pelayo Connery, CNN Underscored

Whether you’re a saver or you recently inherited a small windfall, you have many options if you have $50,000 — or any amount of money — to invest in 2023. We asked two financial experts for their best advice on how to invest $50,000 right now. Their answers may surprise you.

“The short answer is it depends,” says Sylvia Kwan, chief investment officer at Ellevest. “The best place to invest right now depends on your financial situation and goals. That said, if you have high-interest debt, you shouldn’t be investing, you should pay down your debt.”

Let’s look at some of your options.

Clear your debt and build an emergency fund
A photo of a couple looking nervously at a piece of paper
Paying down debts early means you save money on interest charges. iStock
With interest rates higher than they’ve been in years, it’s no surprise that both experts we spoke to expressed the same sentiment about wiping down debt first and foremost.

Assuming high-interest debt is not an issue, Kwan says the next thing to do is make sure you have an emergency fund with three to nine months’ worth of expenses and make sure it’s fully liquid in a bank, savings, or money market fund where you can access it. “As rates have gone up, that money can earn 4 to 5 percent in a money market fund.”

Rob Williams, managing director of financial planning and wealth management at Schwab, agrees. “A money market fund is a great, stable investment that won’t rise and fall as much [as other investments] but it will generate payments.”

If you do have debt and can’t pay it off immediately, consider opening a balance transfer credit card with a promotional 0% APR offer. This will give you extra time to pay down your debt without interest charges.

One great option is the U.S. Bank Visa® Platinum Card. This card gives you a 0% intro APR on new purchases and balance transfers for the first 18 billing cycles (then a variable 18.74% - 29.74% APR). Plus, you’ll get free cell phone insurance if you pay your monthly phone bill with the card.

Review: Pay down your debt faster with the U.S. Bank Visa Platinum credit card

Earn interest with CDs and T Bills
Pattern of pink piggy bank with black eyes on pink background. 
You can lock in high interest rates with CDs and T-Bills. Getty Images
Once your debt and your emergency fund are cleared away, consider how soon you are likely to need the money.

“If you may need it for a home down payment or something else within a year or so, “then consider Certificates of Deposit (CDs) and Treasury Bills (T Bills), which are popular now given how high the yields are,” Kwan says.

If you don’t think you’ll need the money within one year but you may want to access it in less than five, a diversified portfolio of stocks and bonds is both Williams’ and Kwan’s best advice.

Right now, you can earn well over 5.0% APY with CDs. For example, Quontic — an online bank — is offering 5.30% APY on one-year CDs. Or if you’d prefer a more traditional bank, Barclays offers 5.50% APY its one-year CDs, at the time of writing.

Compare CD rates with our partner, Money.com.

That said, both of these options lock up your money for a certain amount of time. If you think you’ll need quick access to your funds, consider putting money in a high-yield savings account instead.

One of our favorite savings accounts — UFB High Yield Savings — is currently offering a high 5.25% APY on deposits. However, this rate can change at any time, unlike a CD which locks in a set interest rate for the duration of the deposit.

Click here to compare savings account rates with Money.com.

Bonds and stocks can grow in value, but know the risks
A photo of a stack of $100 bills on a green background
Earn 1% cash back when you spend and 1% cash back when you pay your balance with the Citi Double Cash. Getty Images
“Think about investments as building blocks, and there are three big ones: cash/cash investments, bonds, and stocks,” Williams says. “Cash and cash investments have guaranteed and relatively stable returns; then you have bonds, which have become increasingly attractive because of inflation.”

Bonds pay interest rates that adjust with inflation, but there are limits to how much you can invest and they’re not fixed, which means the rate of return can go down or up. “There’s no locking it in,” says Williams.

If you’re in it for the long term, stocks can be an a good investment because they provide the greatest potential for growth and appreciation. But to reap the highest rewards, you have to be willing to do your own research and part with the money for some time. And remember, stocks can lose value too.

ETFs let you easily diversify your portfolio
A photo of the exterior of the New York Stock Exchange in New York City's Financial District
ETFs can give you broad market exposure with the potential to grow your savings. wanderluster/iStock Unreleased/Getty Images
Similar to bonds, ETFs or “exchange-traded funds” often correlate to inflation, Kwan says. These funds trade on exchanges, providing a bundle of assets you can buy and sell, potentially lowering your risk while diversifying your portfolio.

“With $50,000 you can get a diversified portfolio of EFTs that are tax efficient and relatively low cost,” Williams says. “The funds are selected by a research team and swapped out when they find they like one better than the other. A diversified portfolio that includes EFTs and mutual funds is best for many long-term investors.”

The real estate conundrum
Bird's eye view of homes in the Chicago suburbs.
Real estate has historically been considered a safe long-term investment — but is now the right time to buy? Getty Images
With interest rates higher than they’ve been in years, it’s much more expensive to invest in real estate, but for the right person, it’s certainly an option. “Many people use real estate as a portion of their net worth and balance sheet,” Williams says.

Investing in real estate is a good option if your credit is good enough to borrow the balance after your down payment, especially if you think you’ll hold on to the asset for at least three to five years. This allows you to refinance your interest rate if rates start trending downward.

No one knows what will happen in the future, but historically speaking, real estate has proven to be a worthwhile investment and one of the best ways for investors to build wealth, so long as you choose something you can realistically afford.

“Just keep in mind that real estate investments are not very liquid,” Williams says. “When markets fall, you can’t just sell and get quick access like you can with other investments like cash stocks.”

Click here to compare mortgage rates with LendingTree.

Bottom line
Whatever you think about doing with $50,000, the most important thing is to do something, says Kwan. “The biggest mistake people make is waiting,” she says. “We always say the best time to invest was yesterday, even if it’s a small amount. People sit on the sidelines for a variety of reasons, but weeks become months and then years and you lose out on compounding.”

The second mistake potential investors make is getting easily distracted by the headlines. “Whether it’s a Bitcoin comeback, T bills, or whatever the next shiny thing is, people gravitate,” Kwan says. “Investing shouldn’t be exciting, it should be boring because that’s what has always worked in the long term.”

Don’t wait — just start where you are, because time is on your side.

Check out CNN Underscored’s list of the best credit cards currently available.

Get all the latest personal finance deals, news and advice at CNN Underscored Money.